feat:  init experience apis 0004 (#9)
logto-io/rfcs: draft/0004-user-sign-in-experience.md

Reviewer: file name should be `0004-experience-api.md`?

---
Start date: 2024-05-24
Author(s): [simeng-li]
Revision: 1
---

> # Sign-in experience and experience APIs

Reviewer: maybe we can use "Experience API" as a proper noun?

```suggestion
# Experience API
```

## 1. Abstract

> Sign-in experience (SIE) is the process of user authentication in the Logto platform. It includes the user interface and experience APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto platform for identity verification and profile management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sign-in experience is the user authentication process in Logto. It encompasses both the user interface and a set of APIs. These APIs enable anonymous end-users to interact with Logto for identity verification and profile fulfillment, thereby completing the authentication process.
```

> Sign-in experience (SIE) is the process of user authentication in the Logto platform. It includes the user interface and experience APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto platform for identity verification and profile management.

Reviewer: btw, i see different words like "Logto platform" and "Logto system" which may be redundant. i use "Logto" in the rest of the comments for simplicity and consistency.

## 2. Motivation

In Logto, we support a variety of modern authentication methods such as password, social login, and multi-factor authentication (MFA). Developers may require a flexible and customizable sign-in experience to meet their specific use cases.

> Current version of `Experience APIs` in Logto are neither well-documented nor publicly available for the developers. This document aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the SIE model in Logto and introduce a new set of `Experience APIs` that allow developers to build a customized sign-in experience for their users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current version of Experience API (internally called interaction APIs) in Logto are neither well-documented nor publicly available for the developers. This document aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the authentication model in Logto and introduce a new set of APIs that allow developers to build a customized sign-in experience for their users.
```

### 3.1 Terminology

> - **Sign-in experience(SIE)**: A user's experience when interacting with Logto platform. Including the front-end user interface and the back-end API calls.

Reviewer: could you add a space before every bracket?

```suggestion
- **Sign-in experience:** The end-user experience when interacting with Logto. Including the front-end user interface and the back-end API calls.
```

> - **Experience APIs**: A set of APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto for identity verification and profile management.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Experience API:** A set of APIs that allow anonymous end-users to interact with Logto for identity verification and profile fulfillment.
```

> - **Interaction session**: A session that is initiated when a user starts interacting with the Logto platform. The session will be terminated once the user logs out or the session expires.

Reviewer: Actually "interaction" and "session" are different concepts in `oidc-provider`. [By default](https://github.com/panva/node-oidc-provider/blob/main/docs/README.md#ttl) interaction has 1 hour TTL while session has 14 days.

To avoid confusion, I suggest we use "interaction" without "session" in the RFC.

```suggestion
- **Interaction:** A short-lived session that starts when a user initiates the sign-in experience. By default, it has an expiration time of one hour.
```

> - **Experience app**: The front-end application that provides the user interface for the user interaction flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Experience app:** The front-end application that provides the user interface for sign-in experience.
```

> - **Social/Single Sign-On(SSO) identity**: A third-party identity provider that allows users to sign in to the Logto platform using their social media or enterprise SSO accounts.

Reviewer: 1. Better to split into two items.
2. The definition is confusing. I assume the "identity" here is some data Logto stores, not an identity provider.

```suggestion
- **Social identity:** The data used to identify a user within a social identity provider, such as Google.
- **SSO (single sign-on) identity:** The data used to identify a user within an identity provider that is configured as an enterprise SSO connector in Logto.
```

> - **Identifier**: A piece of information that can be used to identify a user in the Logto system. For example, username, email, phone number, or social/SSO identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Identifier:** A piece of information used to identify a user in Logto. It could be a username, email, phone number, social identity, SSO identity, among others. Each identifier should be unique within its type.
```

> - **Verification record**: A `verification record` is a group of security data can be used to verify a user's identity by such as password, verification code, or TOTP code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Verification record:** A group of data can be used to verify a user's identity by such as password, verification code, or TOTP code.
```

How about social / sso?

Author: such as? Just randomly pick some verification type here.

> - **Verification code**: A one-time code sent to the user's email or phone number for identity verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Verification code:** A one-time code sent to the user's email or phone number for identity verification.
```

> - **Verification id**: The unique identifier for a verification record. Generated by the Logto server when a verification flow is initiated. User need to provide the verification id along with additional security information to verify their identity. The verification id can also be used to track the verification record status within the interaction session.

Reviewer: I didn't see the definition of "verification flow" though

```suggestion
- **Verification ID:** A unique identifier for a verification record. It's a random string generated by the Logto server when a verification record is initiated. Users need to provide the verification ID along with additional security information to verify their identity. The verification ID can also be used to track the status of the verification record within the interaction.
```

> - **Multi-Factor Authentication(MFA)**: A security process that requires more than one verification factor to verify a user's identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Multi-factor authentication (MFA)**: A security process that requires more than one verification factor to complete the authentication.
```

## 4. Definitions

> A complete user `Sign-in experience` in Logto consists of four key steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A complete user sign-in experience in Logto consists of four key steps:
```

> 1. **Identification**: The user needs to provide a unique `identifier` to the platform. This can be a username, email address, or third-party social identity. It will be used to uniquely identify the user in the system.

Reviewer: Since we defined "identifier" before, here we can omit some adjectives

```suggestion
1. **Identification**: The user needs to provide an identifier to Logto. This can be a username, email address, social identity, or SSO identity. It will be used to identify the user for the current interaction.
```

> 2. **Verification**: The `verification` process is used to verify the user's identity by asking for additional security information. This can be a password, a one-time code, or a passkey. Upon the security settings multiple verification methods can be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Verification**: The process to verify a user's identity by requesting additional security information. This can be a password, a one-time code, a passkey, etc. Upon the security settings, multiple verification methods can be used.
```

> 3. **Profile completion**: The user may be prompted to complete their `profile` and `mfa` settings during a interaction session. This can be a first-time user registration, a mandatory profile and `mfa` settings update for exiting users, or a additional third-party identity linking.

Reviewer: why do we have "an additional third-party identity linking" in this step?

```suggestion
3. **Profile fulfillment**: During an interaction, the user may be prompted to complete their profile and MFA settings. This could be a requirement for user registration, a mandatory update for profile and MFA settings for existing users, and so on.
```

> 4. **Authentication**: The last step is the `authentication` process. The user will be authenticated and granted access to the platform by submitting current interaction session once all the mandatory security checks are resolved.

Reviewer: This one looks ambiguous. E.g. What are "mandatory security checks"? Do we handle the consent screen here?

> ### 4.1 Interaction events

Reviewer: i'm stopping here today - better to reorg this before pull request reviewing

Reviewer: can you double check typos, letter cases, and spaces?

| ------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `initiated`               | The interaction session is initiated when a user sends an authentication request to the Logto. | The user can only have one active interaction session at a time. All experience APIs require a valid interaction session.                                 |
| `identified`              | The user has provided a valid identifier and at least one related verification record.         | The user can be identified by the Logto system. The interaction session can access the user's profile and MFA settings for further security checks.       |
| `verified`                | The user has provide all necessary verification records.                                       | The user is fully verified by the Logto system. The user can proceed to the user profile completion and authentication process based on the SIE settings. |

> | `authenticated`           | The interaction session has been submitted. Authorization granted                              | The user can access the platform resources and services. The interaction session will be terminated once the user logs out or the session expires.        |

Reviewer: can we align the format with [other rfcs](https://github.com/logto-io/rfcs/blob/master/draft/0001-organization.md#611-token-parameters)

Reviewer: in general i think we can use bullet points for better readability. i'll update 0001 soon

| ------------------- | ---------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| interactionEvent    | InteractionEvent | he interaction event for the current interaction session.                                                                                      |
| accountId           | string           | The accountId of the user for the current interaction session. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier. |
| verificationRecords | Verification[]   | The verification record list attached to the current interaction session.                                                                      |
| profile             | Profile          | The user provided profile data in the current interaction session that needs to be stored to user DB.                                          |

## 6. Drawbacks

## 7. Rationale and alternatives

## 8.Future possibilities

> 

Reviewer: empty?

## Appendix A. Experience APIs

The experience APIs are a set of APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto platform to complete the user interaction flow.

### 1. Interaction events API

```ts
type Identifier = {
  type: "username" | "email" | "phone";
  value: string;
};

type Verification = {
  type: "password" | "verification_code";
  /** Can be omitted if a existing verified verification record exist */
  value?: string;
  /** Required if a existing verification record is created for the given identifier */
  verificationId?: string;
};
```

#### Register

> `POST /experience/api/register`

Reviewer: should be `/api/experience/register`?

Reviewer: Actually I could not see how these APIs are connected with the interaction lifecycle? E.g. Under what conditions these APIs can be called? How will they affect the interaction status?

---
Start date: 2024-05-24
Author(s): [simeng-li]
Revision: 1
---

> # Experience APIs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Experience API
```

## 1. Abstract

> Sign-in experience is the user authentication process in Logto. It encompasses both the user interface and a set of APIs. These APIs enable anonymous end-users to interact with Logto for identity verification and profile fulfillment, thereby completing the authentication and authorization process.

Reviewer: Abstract should summarize the whole document with clear statements. E.g. "This document/specification..."

Samples: [0001](https://github.com/logto-io/rfcs/blob/master/draft/0001-organization.md#1-overview) [0005](https://github.com/logto-io/rfcs/blob/master/draft/0005-impersonation.md#overview)

Also it's "Overview" in our template.

## 2. Motivation

> In Logto, we support a variety of modern authentication methods such as password, social login, and multi-factor authentication (MFA). Developers may require a flexible and customizable sign-in experience to meet their specific use cases.

Reviewer: Technically, MFA is not a "authentication method"? And password is not "modern"?

The current version of Experience API (internally called interaction API) in Logto are neither well-documented nor publicly available for the developers. This document aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the authentication model in Logto and introduce a new set of APIs that allow developers to build a customized sign-in experience for their users.

## 3. Introduction

### 3.1 Terminology

> - **Sign-in experience**: A user's experience when interacting with Logto. Including the front-end user interface and the back-end API calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Sign-in experience**: An end user's experience when interacting with Logto. Including the front-end user interface and the back-end API calls.
```

> - **Sign-in experience settings**: The configuration settings that define the behavior of the sign-in experience。 Including the required identifiers, verification methods, profile data, and MFA settings. Developers can customize the sign-in experience settings to meet their specific requirements.

Reviewer: “configuration settings” sounds duplicate

Reviewer: 😂
```suggestion
- **Sign-in experience settings**: The configuration settings that define the behavior of the sign-in experience. Including the required identifiers, verification methods, profile data, and MFA settings. Developers can customize the sign-in experience settings to meet their specific requirements.
```

- **Experience API**: A set of APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto for identity verification and profile fulfillment.
- **Experience app**: The front-end application that provides the user interface for sign-in experience.
- **Interaction**: A short-lived session that starts when a user initiates the sign-in experience. By default, it has an expiration time of one hour.
- **Social identity**: The data used to identify a user within a social identity provider, such as Google.

> - **SSO (Single sign-on) identity**: The data used to identify a user within an identity provider that is configured as an enterprise SSO connector in Logto.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SSO (single sign-on) identity**: The data used to identify a user within an identity provider that is configured as an enterprise SSO connector in Logto.
```

- **Identifier**: A piece of information used to identify a user in Logto. It could be a username, email, phone number, social identity, SSO identity, among others. Each identifier should be unique within its type.
- **Verification code**: A one-time code sent to the user's email or phone number for identity verification.
- **Verification record**: A group of data can be used to verify a user's identity by such as password, verification code, social identity, etc.
- **Verification ID**: A unique identifier for a verification record. It's a random string generated by the Logto server when a verification record is initiated. Users need to provide the verification ID along with additional security information to verify their identity. The verification ID can also be used to track the status of the verification record within the interaction.
- **Multi-factor authentication (MFA)**: A security process that requires more than one verification factor to complete the interaction. It can be used as an additional security check during the sign-in experience.

> - **First party application**: A application that is built and managed by the same company that uses Logto for user authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **First-party application**: An application that is built and managed by the same developer or team that uses Logto for user identity management.
```

> - **Third party application**: A application that is owned and managed by a different company that uses Logto as a external identity provider. E.g. A external application that uses Logto as a enterprise SSO provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Third-party application**: An application owned and managed by a different entity than the one that built the first-party applications. For example, an external application that uses Logto as an enterprise SSO provider.
```

> ### 3.2 User experience

Reviewer: I'm stopping here today. Will continue tomorrow.

> The user sign-in experience in Logto consists of the following key steps:

Reviewer: Do we need to mention not all steps are required? E.g. for forgot password, profile fulfillment and consent may not be required.

> 1. **Sign-in experience initiation**: When the client application sends an authentication request to Logto, the user is redirected to Logto's experience app, initiating a new interaction for the authentication process.

Reviewer: 1. we will allow custom experience app, so "Logto's" can be removed?
2. if "consent" is authorization, we should include it here

```suggestion
1. **Sign-in experience initiation**: When the client application sends an authentication request to Logto, the user is redirected to the experience app, initiating a new interaction for the authentication and authorization process.
```

> 2. **Identification**: The user must provide an verified identifier to Logto, such as a username, email address, phone number, social identity, or SSO identity. This identifier is used to recognize the user during the interaction.

Reviewer: identify?

```suggestion
2. **Identification**: The user must provide an verified identifier to Logto, such as a username, email address, phone number, social identity, or SSO identity. This identifier is used to identify the user during the interaction.
```

Reviewer: i'm wondering if we allow to use passkey here?

Author: We could update the identifier section once the passkey as a primary verification method is supported. Since we put a `such as` as a prefix, I think is fine to just list a few standard ones here, and we may extend whatever extra identifiers we need in the future.

3. **Verification**: The process to verify a user's identity by requesting additional security information. This can be a one-time code, or a passkey, etc. Upon the security settings, multiple verification methods can be used.

> 4. **Profile fulfillment**: During the interaction, the user may be prompted to complete their profile and MFA settings. This can be necessary for user registration or mandatory updates for existing users' profiles and MFA settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Profile fulfillment**: During the interaction, the user may be prompted to complete their profile and / or verification settings. This can be necessary for user registration or mandatory updates for existing users.
```

5. **Authentication**: Once the user has completed all the necessary steps, they can submit the interaction to get authenticated by Logto. All the user's profile and MFA settings updates will be saved to the user database.
6. **Consent**: Users may need to grant consent for specific actions upon the requested authorization details. This could involve sharing personal information, allowing access for their organization, or granting permissions to specific resources. For first-party applications, consent is implicit and handled automatically by Logto once user get authenticated. For third-party applications, consent is explicit, and the user will be prompted to grant the necessary permissions after a successful interaction submission.

> 7. **Authorization**: The final step in the sign-in experience. Once the user has been authenticated and consented to the necessary actions, they will be redirected back to the client application with granted authorization.

Reviewer: How about "Submission" or something

Author: It might be confused with the interaction submission. One way I can think of is replacing the `Authentication` step with `Submission`. But not sure about that either. Authentication might be more precise.

## 4. Definitions

### 4.1 Interaction event

Interaction event represent the user's current interaction purpose with Logto. Logto will use the interaction event to track the user's interaction progress and provide the corresponding interaction validation and actions.

The following are the types of interaction event supported by Logto:

- **Register**: A new user signs up for a account in Logto.

> - **SignIn**: An existing user signs in to their account in Logto.

Reviewer: can we convert between register / sign-in?

Author: We can, but not sure whether we should add an extra definition for such a flow. 
Technically all interaction events can be overwritten into another. e.g. call a `/sign-in` endpoint first. Then send another `/forgot-password` request. 
I was thinking the concept here is more like whether the verification records can be shared by `SignIn` and `Register`, but not  `ForgotPassword`.

- **ForgotPassword**: A user forgets the password and initiates an account recovery process to reset password.

> ### 4.2 Identifiers

Reviewer: do we support passkey?

Author: Not yet by the product. We may update the RFC later once we fully support the passkey as a primary method. The limitation here is passkey settings are stored under the user's MFA settings field.  It follows the standard MFA enable/disable settings in our code flow. Need some extra updates to support it as a primary sign-in method.  Not in the current scope.

> The following are the types of `identifiers` supported by Logto that can be used to uniquely identify a user in the interaction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following are the types of identifiers supported by Logto that can be used to uniquely identify a user in the interaction:
```

- **Username**: A user's unique username.
- **Email**: A verified user's email address.
- **Phone**: A verified user's phone number.
- **Social identity**: A verified user identity data provided by a social identity provider.

> - **SSO identity**: A verified user identity data provided by a enterprise SSO connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **SSO identity**: A verified user identity data provided by an enterprise SSO connector.
```

### 4.3 Verification record

> A verification record contains the necessary security information to verify a user's identity. One or more verification records can be created and verified using the Experience APIs during the sign-in process.

Reviewer: since "Experience API" is a proper noun, no "the" is needed i think

```suggestion
A verification record contains the necessary security information to verify a user's identity. One or more verification records can be created and verified via Experience API during the sign-in process.
```

> #### 4.3.1. Primary verification

Reviewer: can you follow the same format for titles?

```suggestion
#### 4.3.1 Primary verification
```

> Primary verification can be used to verify the user's identity with a given identifier. The following are the primary verification record types supported by Logto:

Reviewer: Will it better to describe "primary verification" as "verifications that can update the interaction status from "Initiated" to "Identified""

Reviewer: and cross-link to the interaction status section below

- **Password**: The user's password, which is the most common method for verifying identity. It can be used to verify the user's `username`, `email`, or `phone` identifier.

> - **Verification code**: A one-time code sent to the user's email or phone number for identifier verification. It can be used to verify the user's `email` or `phone` identifier.

Reviewer: should we mention expiry here?

- **Social authentication**: An authenticated social identity used to directly identify and verify a user.

> - **SSO authentication**: An authenticated SSO identity used to directly identify and verify a user.

Reviewer: should we use "social / SSO identity" here to align with the terms defined?
```suggestion
- **Social identity**: An authenticated social identity used to directly identify and verify a user.
- **SSO identity**: An authenticated SSO identity used to directly identify and verify a user.
```

> #### 4.3.2. Multi-factor authentication(MFA) verification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4.3.2 Multi-factor authentication (MFA) verification
```

MFA is a security process that requires more than one verification factor to confirm a user's identity. It can be used as an additional security check during user interaction. Developers can enable MFA using Logto's sign-in experience settings. Once enabled, users will be prompted to provide additional MFA verification records during the interaction. The following are the MFA verification record types supported by Logto:

> - **TOTP code**: A time-based one-time code generated by a TOTP app for identity verification.

Reviewer: OTP stands for "one-time password" so no need for "code"
```suggestion
- **TOTP**: A time-based one-time code generated by a TOTP app for identity verification.
```

> - **WebAuthn**: A WebAuthn credential used to verify a user's identity.

Reviewer: should we use "passkey" instead, as i saw "passkey" all the time instead of WebAuthn. we can mention it for the first appearance though:
```suggestion
- **Passkey**: A passkey (WebAuthn) credential used to verify a user's identity.
```

> - **Backup code**: A set of backup codes used to verify a user's identity when other MFA verification methods are unavailable.

Reviewer: per offline discussion, should we consider backup codes as a primary verification method as well?

Author: Same as the passkey as a primary sign-in method. Prefer to update the RFC once the full feature spec is ready. As it may involve multiple flow and configuration updates.

### 4.4 User profile

> The user profile consists of the user data that will be stored in the Logto user database. Any new profile data provided by the user in a interaction will be saved to the database once the interaction is submitted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user profile consists of the user data that will be stored in the Logto database. Any new profile data provided by the user in an interaction will be saved once the interaction is submitted.
```

> Developers can use Logto sign-in experience settings to define the required profile data and MFA settings that need to be collected from the user during the interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can use Logto sign-in experience settings to define the required profile data and MFA settings that need to be collected from the user for submitting the interaction.
```

#### 4.4.1 User identifier

> The profile data that can be used as unique identifiers for the user within the sign-in experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User identifiers can be configured as a requirement for the profile fulfillment stage.
```

- **Username**: A unique username to identify the user in Logto.
- **Email**: Requires a verified `verification code` verification record for the email address in the interaction to claim the ownership of the email address.
- **Phone**: Requires a verified `verification code` verification record for the phone number in the interaction to claim the ownership of the phone number.
- **Social Identity**: Requires a authenticated `social authentication` verification record to verify the social identity in the interaction.

> - **SSO Identity**: Requires a authenticated `SSO authentication` verification record to verify the SSO identity in the interaction.

Reviewer: Instead of listing all identifiers and their verification requirements here, how about:

1. Cross-link to the "Identifiers" section, saying we identifiers can be required here.
2. Saying that except for "username", other acceptable verification can be found in the "Verification record" section.

#### 4.4.3 Password

The user's password, that can be used as a primary verification method to verify the user's identity during the interaction. The password can be set, updated, based on different interaction events:

- The `password` can be set during the `Register` interaction event.
- The `password` can be set and updated during the `ForgotPassword` interaction event.
- The `password` can be set during the `SignIn` interaction event only if the user has not set a password before.

> #### 4.4.3 MFAs settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### 4.4.3 MFA settings
```

> In order to enable MFA verification for the user, the user must provide the necessary MFA settings in Logto. The following MFA settings can be created and attached to the user's profile during the interaction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to meet the MFA requirement, the user must provide necessary MFA settings to Logto. The following MFA settings can be created and attached to the user during the interaction:
```

> - **TOTP secret**: A TOTP secret used to generate time-based one-time codes for MFA verification. A `TOTP code` verification record is required to verify the TOTP secret.

Reviewer: don't use code format until it's code

```suggestion
- **TOTP secret**: A TOTP secret used to generate time-based one-time codes for MFA verification. A TOTP code verification record is required to verify the TOTP secret.
```

> - **WebAuthn registration**: A WebAuthn credential used to verify a user's identity. A `WebAuthn` verification record is required to verify the WebAuthn registration.

Reviewer: maybe passkey?

> - **Backup codes**: A set of backup codes used to verify a user's identity when other MFA verification methods are unavailable.

Reviewer: The codes are not user-provided. May be a separate paragraph?

## 5. Interaction

> Logto uses the interaction to track the user's progress and status during the sign-in experience. All the interaction data will be stored in the short-lived authentication session and submitted to Logto once the user completes the interaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logto uses interactions to track the user's progress and status during the sign-in experience. All the interaction data will be stored in a short-lived session and submitted to Logto once the user completes the interaction.
```

> ### 5.1 Interaction schema

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 5.1 Interaction data schema
```

or just

```suggestion
### 5.1 Interaction data
```

> - **accountId**: The unique ID of the user for the current interaction. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier.

Reviewer: 1. here we need the backtick quote because it's code

```suggestion
- **`accountId`**: The unique ID of the user for the current interaction. Only available once the user is identified by at least one verified identifier.
```

2. "Account" doesn't show up in any other place. Should we use `userId` instead?

> - **interactionEvent**: The interaction event for the current interaction.

Reviewer: should we list the enums here?

Author: Add a cross-link instead.

- **verificationRecords**: The verification record list created during the current interaction.

> - **profile**: The user provided profile data in the current interaction that needs to be updated in the user database.

Reviewer: do we need to specify some basic types, e.g. string, enum, array, object

> - **profile**: The user provided profile data in the current interaction that needs to be updated in the user database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **verificationRecords**: The verification record list created during the current interaction.
- **profile**: The user provided profile data in the current interaction that needs to be updated.
```

> ### 5.2 Interaction status

Reviewer: Should we mention that:

1. Interaction status is a computed value, cannot be manually updated
2. Once the status updated to a non-initiated status, it cannot go back
3. In rare cases, some status will degrade. E.g. "Verified" -> "Identified" is MFA settings are updated on-the-fly.

In a sign-in experience, the user's interaction progress will be tracked based on the sign-in experience settings and the data provided by the user. Interaction status will be used to determine the user's current progress and the required actions to complete the interaction.

- **Initiated**: The interaction is initiated by the user.
- **Identified**: The user is identified by a verified identifier.
- **Verified**: The user is verified by all the necessary verification records, including the MFA.

> - **ProfileFulfilled**: The user has provided all the necessary profile data and MFA settings.

Reviewer: if it's not a code enum, we can use nature language "Profile fulfilled"

> #### 5.2.1 Sign-in interaction status

Reviewer: These interactions can actually sit on a higher layer:

```suggestion
### 5.3 Sign-in interaction
```

> Based on the user's sign-in experience progress and user provided data, Logto will track the sign-in interaction using the following status:

Reviewer: Something like:

```suggestion
The sign-in interaction may vary based on the sign-in experience settings. Here's how interaction status changes during a sign-in interaction:
```

Reviewer: Plus, instead of listing these status, how about list the transition criteria? So the headings will become:

1. Initiated -> Identified
2. ...

Reviewer: I'm skipping the rest of this section since if we align with the comments above, the rest of this section will notably change.

Author: To be discussed offline here. Add a note ahead

1. Initiated: The interaction is initiated by the user.

>    - **accountId**: NULL. The user has not been identified yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - **`accountId`**: NULL. The user has not been identified yet.
```

or 

```suggestion
   - `accountId`: NULL. The user has not been identified yet.
```

   - **profile**: NULL. The user can not provide profile data until they are identified.

2. Identified: The user is identified by at least one verified identifier email or phone.

   - **accountId**: REQUIRED. The userId of the user for the current interaction.
   - **interactionEvent**: REQUIRED. The `ForgetPassword` interaction event has been specified.
   - **verificationRecords**: REQUIRED. The identifier verification records are created and verified.
   - **profile**: NULL. The user has not provided the password yet.

3. ProfileFulfilled: The user has the new password provided.

   - **accountId**: REQUIRED. The userId of the user for the current interaction.
   - **interactionEvent**: REQUIRED. The `ForgetPassword` interaction event has been specified.
   - **verificationRecords**: REQUIRED. The identifier verification records are created and verified.
   - **profile**: REQUIRED. The password has been set.

4. Submitted: The user has submitted the interaction to Logto for authentication. The user's password will be updated in the user database. Interaction will be completed.

## 6. Drawbacks

### 6.1 Compatibility

> Unlike the current internal interaction APIs, the new experience APIs are publicly available to the developers, as they can be used to build a customized sign-in experience. This means any changes to the experience APIs may impact the existing developers who rely on the APIs to build their sign-in experience. We need to ensure backward compatibility and carefully version the experience APIs to avoid breaking changes for the developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the current internal interaction APIs, the new Experience API is publicly available to the developers, as they can be used to build a customized sign-in experience. This means any changes to the Experience API may impact the existing developers who rely on these APIs to build their sign-in experience. We need to ensure backward compatibility and carefully version the Experience API to avoid breaking changes for the developers.
```

### 6.2 Complexity

> The new experience API is stateful and tightly coupled with the sign-in interaction on the Logto server side. Developers must fully understand the concept of interactions in Logto and the related sign-in experience settings to use the experience APIs correctly. This requirement can increase the learning curve and development complexity, potentially leading to misuse or integration errors if not properly understood and implemented.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new Experience API is stateful and tightly coupled with the interaction in the Logto server. Developers must fully understand the concept of interactions in Logto and the related sign-in experience settings to use the APIs correctly. This requirement can increase the learning curve and development complexity, potentially leading to misuse or integration errors if not properly understood and implemented.
```

### 6.3 Cost

> Introducing new set of experience APIs will require additional development effort and maintenance cost. Instead of our current internal interaction APIs, the new experience APIs need to be well-documented and maintained to ensure a consistent and reliable sign-in experience for the developers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Introducing a new set of APIs will require additional development effort and maintenance cost. Unlike our current internal interaction APIs, these new APIs need to be well-documented and maintained to ensure a consistent and reliable sign-in experience for the developers.
```

> We will need to keep two sets of APIs in sync to ensure that the experience APIs are up-to-date with the internal interaction APIs. This will require additional development and testing effort to maintain the consistency between the two sets of APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will need to keep two sets of APIs in sync to ensure that the new APIs are up-to-date with the internal interaction APIs. This will require additional development and testing effort to maintain the consistency between these two sets of APIs.
```

Reviewer: Is it actually the opposite? Our internal APIs should keep synced with the new APIs.

Author: internal APIs should be removed? They only co-exist during the implementation of experience APIs.

### 6.4 Performance overhead

> To maintain interaction status and decouple API logic, multiple API requests are required from the client side. For example, an additional submit request must be called each time to submit and validate the interaction requirements, even for a simple username and password sign-in flow. Instead of a single sign-in request, an extra submit request is necessary. This increases the number of API calls, potentially leading to higher latency and reduced performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maintain interaction status and decouple API logic, multiple API requests are required from the client side. For example, an additional submit request must be called each time to submit and validate the interaction requirements, even for a simple username and password sign-in flow. This increases the number of API calls, potentially leading to higher latency and reduced performance.
```

## 7. Rationale and alternatives

Logto provides a variety of authentication and verification methods to meet the diverse needs of developers and end-users. We have been constantly improving the sign-in experience configurations and providing extra customization options for the developers to build a flexible and secure sign-in experience.

> As the sign-in experience is a critical part of the user authentication process, and it is hard to enumerate all the possible uses cases, we believe that opening up the experience APIs to the developers with a customizable front-end user interface will provide more flexibility and control over the sign-in experience.

Reviewer: Should we mention the effort of designing and maintaining the prebuilt UI?

> Logto provides a variety of authentication and verification methods to meet the diverse needs of developers and end-users. We have been constantly improving the sign-in experience configurations and providing extra customization options for the developers to build a flexible and secure sign-in experience.
> As the sign-in experience is a critical part of the user authentication process, and it is hard to enumerate all the possible uses cases, we believe that opening up the experience APIs to the developers with a customizable front-end user interface will provide more flexibility and control over the sign-in experience.

Reviewer: If you need a new paragraph, an additional empty line is required in MD:

```suggestion
Logto provides a variety of authentication and verification methods to meet the diverse needs of developers and end-users. We have been constantly improving the sign-in experience configurations and providing extra customization options for the developers to build a flexible and secure sign-in experience.

As the sign-in experience is a critical part of the user authentication process, and it is hard to enumerate all the possible uses cases, we believe that opening up the experience APIs to the developers with a customizable front-end user interface will provide more flexibility and control over the sign-in experience.
```

### 7.1 Considerations

> 1. Developer Friendly: The current internal interaction APIs are not well-documented and are difficult for developers to use. These APIs are tightly coupled with Logto's server-side interaction logic and involve numerous Logto-specific concepts and definitions, resulting in a steep learning curve. We believe that providing a new set of well-documented and user-friendly experience APIs will significantly ease the development process for creating customized sign-in experiences. Additionally, we need to offer a detailed explanation of the underlying user interaction structure to help developers better understand the sign-in experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Developer friendliness: The current internal interaction APIs are not well-documented and are difficult for developers to use. These APIs are tightly coupled with Logto's server-side interaction logic and involve numerous Logto-specific concepts and definitions, resulting in a steep learning curve. We believe that providing a new set of well-documented and user-friendly experience APIs will significantly ease the development process for creating customized sign-in experiences. Additionally, we need to offer a detailed explanation of the underlying user interaction structure to help developers better understand the sign-in experience.
```

2. High flexibility: We have identified several limitations in the current internal interaction APIs, such as the lack of support for custom user profile fields and the increasingly bloated interaction structure within the Logto server. By introducing the new experience API, we can redefine the interaction in Logto, enhancing the flexibility and sustainability of the sign-in experience.

### 7.2 Alternatives

> Considering no extra new features or customization options are added, instead of introducing a new set of experience APIs, we could consider providing comprehensive documentation for the existing internal interaction APIs. This approach would minimize the risk of breaking changes to the sign-in experience. However, even with detailed documentation, developers may still find it challenging to understand and effectively use these internal interaction APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Considering no extra new features or customization options are added, instead of introducing a new set of APIs, we could consider providing comprehensive documentation for the existing internal interaction APIs. This approach would minimize the risk of breaking changes to the sign-in experience. However, even with detailed documentation, developers may still find it challenging to understand and effectively use these internal interaction APIs.
```

Moreover, continuing to use our existing APIs and interaction design will likely lead to a rapidly increasing maintenance effort as we keep introducing new features and flows to our system. Eventually, we will reach a point where refactoring and migrating our existing sign-in experience logic will be unavoidable. Therefore, the best time to implement these changes is now.

## 8.Future possibilities

### 8.1.User profile management

The verification and user profile APIs can be extended to support more advanced user profile management features, outside the sign-in experience. For example, users can update their profile data, manage their MFA settings, and view their interaction history using the experience APIs through a dedicated user profile management interface.

> ### 8.2 Simplified experience API calls
> 
> Reduce the complexity of the experience API calls. We are considering merging several API calls into a single API call to simplify the user interaction flow. For example, omit the extra submit request for the sign-in experience, consider introducing a `autoSubmit` flag in some of the interaction APIs to automatically submit the interaction once all the requirements are met.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8.2 Simplified API calls

Reduce the complexity of the API calls. We are considering merging several API calls into a single API call to simplify the user interaction flow. For example, omit the extra submit request for the sign-in experience, consider introducing a `autoSubmit` flag in some of the interaction APIs to automatically submit the interaction once all the requirements are met.
```

> ### 8.3 Provide additional custom user profiles in a sign-in experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8.3 Support custom user profile
```

The user profile data can be extended to support custom user profile fields in the sign-in experience. Developers can define and set required custom profile fields for the user during the interaction. This will allow developers to collect additional user data and customize the user profile based on their specific use cases.

### 8.4 Experience API SDK

> Develop a client-side SDK that simplifies the integration of the experience APIs into the front-end application. The SDK can provide a set of pre-built components and functions that handle the interaction flow, user profile management, and MFA settings. This will help developers quickly integrate the experience APIs into their applications and build a customized sign-in experience with minimal effort.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Develop a client-side SDK that simplifies the integration of the Experience API into the front-end application. The SDK can provide a set of pre-built components and functions that handle the interaction flow, user profile management, and MFA settings. This will help developers quickly integrate the Experience API into their applications and build a customized sign-in experience with minimal effort.
```

> ### 8.5 Additional password and social/SSO verification APIs
> 
> Currently the password verification record was created directly via the sign-in user identification API. We may provide additional verification APIs to create and verify the password verification record separately. This will allow developers to customize the password verification process and create a password verification record outside the sign-in experience.
> Similarly, we can provide additional verification APIs to create and verify the social/SSO verification record separately. This will allow developers to customize the social/SSO authentication process and create a social/SSO verification record outside the sign-in experience as well.
> 
> ### 8.6 Open verification APIs
> 
> The verification APIs as well as the verification record can be extended to support other verification circumstances outside the sign-in experience. For example, support dynamic MFA verification and the verification for the user profile updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 8.5 Standalone verification APIs

Currently, a verification record is created directly via the Experience API. We may provide standalone verification APIs to create and verify these verification records without an interaction context. This will allow developers to customize the verification process and use it in a separate flow, e.g., building a GitHub-like sudo mode.
```

## Appendix A. Experience API

The experience API are a set of APIs that allow end-users to interact with the Logto to complete the user sign-in experience.

```ts
type Identifier = {
  type: "username" | "email" | "phone";
  value: string;
};
```

> ### 1. User identification API

Reviewer: since it's not a proper noun:

```suggestion
### 1. User identification APIs
```

> The user identification API is the core set of APIs to identify the user during the sign-in experience.

Reviewer: should we mention these APIs all start with `/api/experience/auth/`?

A successful user identification will change the interaction status from `Initiated` to `Identified`.

- **Specify interaction event type**: Define the type of interaction event to be initiated.
- **Provide necessary identifiers**: The user must provide the necessary identifiers to identify themselves in the interaction.
- **Provide necessary verification records**: The user must provide the necessary verification records to verify their identity in the interaction.

#### Sign in

> - `POST /api/experience/auth/sign-in/password`

Reviewer: maybe

```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/id/sign-in/password`
```

or

```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/identification/sign-in/password`
```

Author: Thought `auth` might be more common. 
Not sure, `/identification/forgot` or `/identification/social/:connectorId/authorization-url` might not be that suitable.

  - A `verificationId` pointing to a verified verification record should be provided if a `email` or `phone` identifier is used to identify the user.
  - If the user provides a `email` or `phone` identifier without a `verificationId`, A new verification code record will be created, and a code will be sent to the given `identifier`.
  - A new user account will be created in Logto if the required identifier are provided and verified.
  - The `accountId` will be set to the new user's `userId` if the user is created successfully.
  - The interaction status will be changed to `Verified` if the user is created successfully. As the new user does not have any existing MFA settings.

  Request body:

  | Field          | Type       | Description                                | Required |
  | -------------- | ---------- | ------------------------------------------ | -------- |
  | identifier     | Identifier | The user's identifier.                     | Yes      |
  | password       | string     | The user's password.                       | No       |
  | verificationId | string     | The unique id for the verification record. | No       |

> - `POST /api/experience/auth/register/verification-code/verify`

Reviewer: how about PUT or PATCH?

```suggestion
- `PUT /api/experience/auth/register/verification-code`
```

Author: If that is the case, should we include `:verificationId` as parameters for those verification endpoints? Otherwise, the PATCH method might not be that appropriate.  Need to discuss this further, as Sijie has suggestions on the new API design, instead of our existing interaction APIs strictly following the restful API naming conversion, could bypass the standard a little bit, add a verb/none at the suffix, and make the API more human friendly.

  The concurrent API to verify the given `identifier` with the provided verification code during the register interaction.

  - The verification record will be verified in the interaction.
  - A new user account will be created in Logto if the required identifier are provided and verified.
  - The `accountId` will be set to the new user's `userId` if the user is created successfully.
  - The interaction status will be changed to `Verified` if the user is created successfully. As the new user does not have any existing MFA settings.

  Request body:

  | Field          | Type       | Description                                           | Required |
  | -------------- | ---------- | ----------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
  | identifier     | Identifier | The user's identifier.                                | Yes      |
  | code           | string     | The verification code to verify the given identifier. | Yes      |
  | verificationId | string     | The unique id for the verification record.            | Yes      |

#### Forgot password

> - `POST /api/experience/forgot-password`

Reviewer: should this also follow the path convention:

```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/auth/forgot-password`
```

and we can make it shorter and more generic e.g.

```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/auth/forgot`
```

thus we can "forgot other things" in the future

  - A `SignIn` interaction event will be initiated for the interaction.
  - A social/SSO verification record will be created in the interaction.

- `POST /api/experience/auth/{social|sso}/:connectorId/authenticate`

  Authenticate the user with the social/SSO provider and identify the user with the authenticated social/SSO identity.

  - The social/SSO verification record will be verified in the interaction.
  - The `accountId` will be set to the user's `userId` if the verification is successful and a user is identified.
  - The interaction status will be changed to `Identified` if the verification is successful and a user is identified.
  - For SSO authentication, if the SSO identity is not found in Logto database, but the verified email is found, the SSO identity will be added to the user profile in the interaction and the user will be identified.

  Request body:

  | Field | Type                   | Description                                |
  | ----- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
  | data  | Record<string, string> | callback data from the social/SSO provider |

> - `POST /api/experience/{social|sso}/:connectorId/register`

Reviewer: lose the path name?

```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/auth/{social|sso}/:connectorId/register`
```

and this does not align with the convention above i.e.

```
/api/experience/auth/{register|sign-in}/{verification-method}
```

Author: The idea was define `/api/experience/auth/{social|sso}/` as a special pathname convention.

  - A new TOTP secret will be generated for the user.
  - A new TOTP verification record will be created in the interaction.

- `POST /api/experience/verification/totp/verify`

  TOTP code verification API.

  - For the first time verification of a new added TOTP secret, the `verificationId` is required.
  - For the first time verification of a new added TOTP secret, the verification record will be verified.
  - For the first time verification of a new added TOTP secret, the new TOTP secret will be inserted into the user profile in the interaction as a new MFA setting.
  - For the existing TOTP secret verification, the `verificationId` empty.
  - For the existing TOTP secret verification, a verified TOTP verification record will be created.

  Request body:

  | Field           | Type   | Description                                      | Required |
  | --------------- | ------ | ------------------------------------------------ | -------- |
  | code            | string | The TOTP code to verify the TOTP MFA method      | Yes      |
  | verificationId? | string | The verification id for the new generated secret | No       |

#### WebAuthn

> - `POST /api/experience/verification/webAuthn/registration`

Reviewer: bro, in general we don't use camelCase in pathnames

  - A new WebAuthn verification record will be created in the interaction with the generated WebAuthn authentication options.

- `POST /api/experience/verification/webAuthn/verify`

  The concurrent API to verify the WebAuthn MFA method with the provided WebAuthn assertion.

  - The WebAuthn assertion data will be verified with the WebAuthn verification record in the interaction.
  - The WebAuthn verification record will be verified if the assertion is successful.
  - A new WebAuthn credential will be inserted into the user profile in the interaction as a new MFA setting if the verification record is for a new WebAuthn registration.

  Request body:

  | Field             | Type              | Description                                                   | Required |
  | ----------------- | ----------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------- | -------- |
  | webAuthnAssertion | WebAuthnAssertion | The WebAuthn assertion data to verify the WebAuthn MFA method | Yes      |
  | verificationId    | string            | The verification record id                                    | Yes      |

#### Backup codes

> - `POST /api/experience/verification/backup-codes/generate`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `POST /api/experience/verification/backup-codes`
```

  Generate a new set of backup codes for the user to set up the Backup Code MFA method.

  - A new set of backup codes will be generated for the user.
  - The backup codes will be inserted into the user profile in the interaction as a new MFA setting.

> - `POST /api/experience/verification/backup-code/verify`

Reviewer: if we mark the backup code unavailable after this, better to use:

```suggestion
- `PUT /api/experience/verification/backup-codes`
```
